Upgrade notes for 1.6 (#7275)
istio/istio.io: content/en/news/releases/1.6.x/announcing-1.6.x/upgrade-notes/index.md

---
title: Upgrade Notes
description: Important changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
weight: 20
---

When you upgrade from Istio 1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x, you need to consider the changes on this page.
These notes detail the changes which purposefully break backwards compatibility with Istio 1.5.x.
The notes also mention changes which preserve backwards compatibility while introducing new behavior.
Changes are only included if the new behavior would be unexpected to a user of Istio 1.5.x.

Currently, Istio doesn't support skip-level upgrades. If you are using Istio 1.4, you must upgrade to Istio 1.5 first, and then upgrade to Istio 1.6. If you upgrade from versions earlier than Istio 1.4, you should first disable Galley's configuration validation. 

> Updated the Galley deployment:

Reviewer: Update the Galley deployment configuration with the following steps:

Author: Fixed. Thanks.

Reviewer: But it was a suggestion:
```suggestion
Update the Galley deployment configuration with the following steps:
```

> 1. Execute `kubectl edit deployment -n istio-system istio-galley` in order to open the Galley deployment in an editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To edit the Galley deployment configuration, run the following command:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl edit deployment -n istio-system istio-galley
{{< /text >}}

```

> 2. Add `--enable-validation=false` to the command section. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the `--enable-validation=false` option to the `command:` section as shown below: 
```

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
kind: Deployment
...
spec:
...
  template:
    ...
    spec:
      ...
      containers:
      - command:
        ...

>         - --log_output_level=default:info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - --log_output_level=default:info
        - --enable-validation=false
```

{{< /text >}}

> 3. Save and quit. The deployment will be updated in the cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Save and quit the editor to update the deployment configuration in the cluster. 
```

> Remove the `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove the `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` Custom Resource (CR) with the following command:
```

- Problems with upgrades
- A confusing user experience
- A less flexible installation

To address these issues, Istio 1.6 minimized the configuration objects deployed during installation.

The following configurations are impacted:

- `global.mtls.enabled`: Configuration removed to avoid confusion. Configure a peer authentication policy to enable [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode) instead.
- No default `Gateway` and associated `Certificate` custom resources are deployed during installation. Go to the [Ingress task](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) to configure a gateway for your mesh.
- Istio no longer creates `Ingress` custom resources  for telemetry addons. Visit [remotely accessing telemetry addons](/docs/tasks/observability/gateways/) to learn how to reach the addons externally.
- The default sidecar configuration is no longer defined through the automatically generated `Sidecar` custom resource. The default configuration is implemented internally and the change should have no impact on deployments.

## Reach Istiod through external workloads

> Istio 1.6 configures Istiod to be `cluster-local` by default. This means that an Istio gateway will only send traffic to an Istiod instance located in the same cluster. Workloads external to the cluster must now access Istiod via the ingress gateway. This configuration change was required to support multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters. Setting Istiod to `cluster-local` prevents the master cluster ingress gateway from seeing the Istiod endpoints in the remote cluster. The Istio team is actively investigating alternatives which do not require a cluster-local Istiod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Istio 1.6, the `cluster-local` configuration of Istiod is enabled by default.  With `cluster-local` enabled, an Istio gateway only sends traffic to an Istiod instance on the same cluster. Workloads on another cluster can only access the  Istiod instance through the Istio gateway. This configuration change supports multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters. This configuration prevents the ingress gateway of the master cluster from seeing the Istiod endpoints of the remote cluster. The Istio team is actively investigating alternatives to no longer require `cluster-local`.
```

Reviewer 2: @rcaballeromx 

> With `cluster-local` enabled, an Istio gateway only sends traffic to an Istiod instance on the same cluster

This isn't quite accurate... it's more than that. This should be `With cluster-local enabled, Istiod will only be reachable from workloads residing within the same cluster`.

Also, we should probably expand on this sentence a bit: `This configuration prevents the ingress gateway of the master cluster from incorrectly forwarding service discovery requests to the Istiod in the remote cluster. The Istio team is actively investigating alternatives which will no longer require a cluster-local Istiod for master/remote deployments.`

Reviewer: @nmittler 
For the first, that's fine as long as it is written more clearly:
`With cluster-local enabled, only workloads running on the same cluster can reach Istiod.`
I'm also fine with expanding, as long as the language is cleaned a bit too:
`This configuration prevents the ingress gateway of the master cluster from incorrectly forwarding service discovery requests to the Istiod in the remote cluster. The Istio team is actively investigating alternatives which no longer require a cluster-local Istiod for master/remote deployments.`

Reviewer 2: suggestions lgtm

Author: Adding. Thanks. To clarify, does this mean that Istiod will only accept traffic from within the same cluster? And this is *required* for multicluster to work, correct? I think that's what I understood before, just want to make sure.

Author: Also, we say that it supports multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters. If I understand correctly, it doesn't support multicluster deployments without master and remote clusters or single cluster deployments. Is that correct?

Author: @nmittler

Reviewer 2: @brian-avery 

> Adding. Thanks. To clarify, does this mean that Istiod will only accept traffic from within the same cluster? And this is required for multicluster to work, correct? I think that's what I understood before, just want to make sure.

Yes, that's right. It's explained in the line `This configuration prevents the ingress gateway of the master cluster from incorrectly forwarding service discovery requests to the Istiod in the remote cluster.`

> Also, we say that it supports multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters. If I understand correctly, it also supports multicluster deployments without master and remote clusters or single cluster deployments. Is that correct? Should we clarify?

Things are sort of broken with multi-master deployments as well, although not so bad. If the ingress round-robins discovery requests between the masters it's generally ok, unless they are way out of sync with each other. The bigger issue is for remote clusters, since they have no discovery information available and if an Envoy connects to it, badness ensues.

Author: Thanks.  That makes sense. Also clarifying that the configuration change is required for multicluster

---
title: Upgrade Notes
description: Important changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
weight: 20
---

When you upgrade from Istio 1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x, you need to consider the changes on this page.
These notes detail the changes which purposefully break backwards compatibility with Istio 1.5.x.
The notes also mention changes which preserve backwards compatibility while introducing new behavior.
Changes are only included if the new behavior would be unexpected to a user of Istio 1.5.x.

Currently, Istio doesn't support skip-level upgrades. If you are using Istio 1.4, you must upgrade to Istio 1.5 first, and then upgrade to Istio 1.6. If you upgrade from versions earlier than Istio 1.4, you should first disable Galley's configuration validation. 

Updated the Galley deployment:

1. To edit the Galley deployment configuration, run the following command:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl edit deployment -n istio-system istio-galley
{{< /text >}}

> 2. Add the `--enable-validation=false` option to the `command:` section as shown below: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the `--enable-validation=false` option to the `command:` section as shown below: 
```

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
kind: Deployment
...
spec:
...
  template:
    ...
    spec:
      ...
      containers:
      - command:
        ...
        - --log_output_level=default:info
        - --enable-validation=false
{{< /text >}}

> 3. Save and quit the editor to update the deployment configuration in the cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Save and quit the editor to update the deployment configuration in the cluster. 
```

Remove the `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` Custom Resource (CR) with the following command:

> {{< text bash >}}

Author: @rcaballeromx Seeing the following from the linter:

./en/news/releases/1.6.x/announcing-1.6.x/upgrade-notes/index.md:22: MD029 Ordered list item prefix
./en/news/releases/1.6.x/announcing-1.6.x/upgrade-notes/index.md:41: MD029 Ordered list item prefix

From Google, it looks like this is because the indentation is restarting and that this should be indented. Spaces don't seem to help. Tabs complain that it should be a multiple of four spaces. Any idea how to get around it?

Reviewer: Adding a four space indentation for this text component would be good but it's not what lint is complaining about.
My suggestions above should fix the issue.

$ kubectl get rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get serviceroles.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
{{< /text >}}

To make sure not to apply any `v1alpha1` security policy accidentally in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy with the following commands:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl delete crd policies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd meshpolicies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd serviceroles.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io
{{< /text >}}

# Istio configuration during installation

Historically, Istio has deployed certain configuration objects as part of the installation. This has caused problems with upgrades, confusing user experience, and makes the installation less flexible. As a result, we have minimized the configurations we ship as part of the installation.

This includes a variety of different configurations:

> * The `global.mtls.enabled` previously enabled strict mTLS. This should instead be done by directly configuring a `PeerAuthentication` policy for [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `global.mtls.enabled` previously enabled strict mTLS. This config is removed to avoid confusion.  You should be configuring a `PeerAuthentication` policy for [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode)
```

Author: ```suggestion
* The `global.mtls.enabled` configuration option previously enabled strict mTLS. This config is removed to avoid confusion.  You should instead configure a `PeerAuthentication` policy for [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode)
```

* The default `Gateway` object, and associated `Certificate` object, are no longer installed by default. See the [Ingress task](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) for information on configuring a Gateway.
* `Ingress` objects for telemetry addons are no longer created. See [Remotely Accessing Telemetry Addons](/docs/tasks/observability/gateways/) for more information on exposing these externally.

> * Removed the default `Sidecar` configuration. This should have no impact.

Author: ```suggestion
* The default sidecar configuration was previously defined with an automatically created `Sidecar` resource. This has been changed to an internal implementation detail and should have no visible impact.
```

---
title: Upgrade Notes
description: Important Changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
weight: 20
---

This page describes changes you need to be aware of when upgrading from Istio
1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x. Here, we detail cases where we intentionally broke backwards
compatibility. We also mention cases where backwards compatibility was preserved
but new behavior was introduced that would be surprising to someone familiar with
the use and operation of Istio 1.5.

## Removal of legacy Helm charts

> In Istio 1.4 we introduced a [new way to install Istio](/blog/2019/introducing-istio-operator/), utilizing the in-cluster Operator or `istioctl install` command. As part of this effort, we deprecated the old Helm charts. Over time, many of the new features added to Istio have been implemented only in these new installation methods. As a result, we have decided to remove the old installation Helm charts in Istio 1.6.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Istio 1.4 we introduced a [new way to install Istio](/blog/2019/introducing-istio-operator/), using the in-cluster Operator or `istioctl install` command. As part of this effort, we deprecated the old Helm charts. Over time, we implemented many of the new Istio features only in these new installation methods. As a result, we have decided to remove the old installation Helm charts in Istio 1.6.
```

> Because there have been a number of changes introduced in Istio 1.5 that were not present in the legacy installation method, such as Istiod and Telemetry V2, we recommend reviewing the [Istio 1.5 Upgrade Notes](/news/releases/1.5.x/announcing-1.5/upgrade-notes/#control-plane-restructuring) before continuing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We recommend reviewing the [Istio 1.5 Upgrade Notes](/news/releases/1.5.x/announcing-1.5/upgrade-notes/#control-plane-restructuring) before continuing, because we introduced several changes in Istio 1.5 that were not present in the legacy installation method, such as Istiod and Telemetry V2.
```

> Upgrade from the legacy Helm charts can now be safely done using a [Control Plane Revision](/blog/2020/multiple-control-planes/). In place upgrade is not supported and may result in downtime, so please follow the [Canary Upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/#canary-upgrades) steps.

Reviewer 3: are we not supporting in place upgrade at all or just for users move from legacy helm charts?

Author: We have documentation for in-place upgrades so I think it's just via helm that's not supported. @howardjohn @ostromart ?

> Upgrade from the legacy Helm charts can now be safely done using a [Control Plane Revision](/blog/2020/multiple-control-planes/). In place upgrade is not supported and may result in downtime, so please follow the [Canary Upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/#canary-upgrades) steps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now safely upgrade from the legacy Helm charts using a [Control Plane Revision](/blog/2020/multiple-control-planes/). In place upgrade is not supported and may result in downtime, so please follow the [Canary Upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/#canary-upgrades) steps.
```

{{< tip >}}

> Istio does not currently support skip-level upgrades. If you are still using Istio 1.4, we recommend first upgrading to Istio 1.5. However, if you do choose to upgrade from previous version, you must first disable Galley configuration validation. This can be done by adding `--enable-validation=false` to the Galley deployment and removing the `istio-galley` `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Istio does not currently support skip-level upgrades. For example, if you are still using Istio 1.4, we recommend first upgrading to Istio 1.5. However, if you choose to upgrade from previous version, you must first disable Galley configuration validation. This can be done by adding `--enable-validation=false` to the Galley deployment and removing the `istio-galley` `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`
```

{{< /tip >}}

## v1alpha1 security policy is not supported anymore

> Istio 1.6 no longer supports the [`v1alpha1` authentication policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/) and [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/), the `v1alpha1` API will have no effect and will be ignored starting 1.6.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Istio 1.6 no longer supports the [`v1alpha1` authentication policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/) and [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/), these `v1alpha1` APIs will be ignored starting 1.6.
```

To check if there is any `v1alpha1` security policy in the cluster, run the following commands:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get policies.authentication.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get meshpolicies.authentication.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get serviceroles.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
{{< /text >}}

> To make sure not to apply any `v1alpha1` security policy accidentally in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy with the following commands:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To make sure not to accidentally apply any `v1alpha1` security policy in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy using the following commands:
```

> To make sure not to apply any `v1alpha1` security policy accidentally in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy with the following commands:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you have migrated these security v1alpha1 resources, to make sure not to apply any `v1alpha1` security policy accidentally in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy with the following commands:
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl delete crd policies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd meshpolicies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd serviceroles.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io
{{< /text >}}

# Istio configuration during installation

> Historically, Istio has deployed certain configuration objects as part of the installation. This has caused problems with upgrades, confusing user experience, and makes the installation less flexible. As a result, we have minimized the configurations we ship as part of the installation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Historically, Istio deployed certain configuration objects as part of the installation. This caused problems with upgrades, a confusing user experience, and makes the installation less flexible. As a result, we minimized the configurations we ship as part of the installation.
```

> This includes a variety of different configurations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This includes a variety of configurations:
```

> * The `global.mtls.enabled` previously enabled strict mTLS. This should instead be done by directly configuring a `PeerAuthentication` policy for [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode)

Reviewer 4: Where you say 'this should be done', do you mean the user should do this differently or that Istio now does this differently automatically?

Author: Clarified wording. Thanks.

* The default `Gateway` object, and associated `Certificate` object, are no longer installed by default. See the [Ingress task](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) for information on configuring a Gateway.
* `Ingress` objects for telemetry addons are no longer created. See [Remotely Accessing Telemetry Addons](/docs/tasks/observability/gateways/) for more information on exposing these externally.

> * Removed the default `Sidecar` configuration. This should have no impact.

Reviewer 3: should we even mention this?  I didn't realize we have default `sidecar` configuration :)

Author: There's also a default described here: https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/reference/config/networking/sidecar/

Reviewer 3: Oh, that is just allow sidecar to communicate to Istio-system by default.  Thanks.

Author: Clarified with John. The default behavior before 1.6 and now is the same. However, before it was defined with an explicit sidecar CRD and now it's internal.

---
title: Upgrade Notes

> description: Important Changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Important changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
```

Author: This file will be removed before merging. Netlify wouldn't render the docs without this.

weight: 20
---

This page describes changes you need to be aware of when upgrading from Istio
1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x. Here, we detail cases where we intentionally broke backwards
compatibility. We also mention cases where backwards compatibility was preserved
but new behavior was introduced that would be surprising to someone familiar with
the use and operation of Istio 1.5.

{{< tip >}}
Istio does not currently support skip-level upgrades. For example, if you are still using Istio 1.4, we recommend first upgrading to Istio 1.5. However, if you choose to upgrade from previous version, you must first disable Galley configuration validation. This can be done by adding `--enable-validation=false` to the Galley deployment and removing the `istio-galley` `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`
{{< /tip >}}

> ## Removal of legacy Helm charts

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Readiness port number change for Gateways

If you are using port 15020 to check the health of your Istio ingressgateway with your Kubernetes network load balancer, you will need to update the port number from 15020 to 15021.

## Removal of legacy Helm charts
```

Reviewer 5: @linsun do you believe this deserves mention in the upgrade notes based on your comment https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/23432#issuecomment-622208734 or is it fine only in the release notes?

> In Istio 1.4 we introduced a [new way to install Istio](/blog/2019/introducing-istio-operator/), using the in-cluster Operator or `istioctl install` command. As part of this effort, we deprecated the old Helm charts. Over time, we implemented many of the new Istio features only in these new installation methods. As a result, we have decided to remove the old installation Helm charts in Istio 1.6.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Istio 1.4 we introduced a [new way to install Istio](/blog/2019/introducing-istio-operator/), using the in-cluster Operator or `istioctl install` command. As part of this effort, we deprecated the old Helm charts in 1.5. Over time, we implemented many of the new Istio features only in these new installation methods. As a result, we have decided to remove the old installation Helm charts in Istio 1.6.
```

> We recommend reviewing the [Istio 1.5 Upgrade Notes](/news/releases/1.5.x/announcing-1.5/upgrade-notes/#control-plane-restructuring) before continuing, because we introduced several changes in Istio 1.5 that were not present in the legacy installation method, such as Istiod and Telemetry V2.

Reviewer 5: Capitalization? I've seen them both ways. Consistency would be nice.

Author: @rcaballeromx Should Telemetry V2 be capitalized?

Reviewer: No, `telemetry v2` would be better.

Author: Thanks. Fixed.

You can now safely upgrade from the legacy Helm charts using a [Control Plane Revision](/blog/2020/multiple-control-planes/). In place upgrade is not supported and may result in downtime, so please follow the [Canary Upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/#canary-upgrades) steps.

## v1alpha1 security policy is not supported anymore

> Istio 1.6 no longer supports the [`v1alpha1` authentication policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/) and [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/), these `v1alpha1` APIs will be ignored starting 1.6.

Author: @rcaballeromx 
How about this?
Starting in Istio 1.6, these `v1alpha1` security policy APIs are ignored.

Instead of: 
Istio 1.6 starts ignoring these `v1alpha1` security policy APIs.

> Instead, Istio 1.6 has split the [`v1alpha1` authentication policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/) and [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/) into the [`v1beta1` Request Authentication Policy](/docs/reference/config/security/request_authentication) and the [`v1beta1` Peer Authentication Policy](/docs/reference/config/security/peer_authentication). The [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/) has been replaced by the [`v1beta1` Authorization Policy](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/). Please migrate to these new resources before upgrading.

Reviewer 5: Should `Please migrate to these new resources before upgrading.` be enclosed in {{< warning >}}. Functionality has changed and someone may just casually glance over this.

Author: I don't think so. Really anything in this document might break a user's upgrade. Since everything is important, I don't think any of it needs callouts.

To check if there is any `v1alpha1` security policy in the cluster, run the following commands:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get policies.authentication.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get meshpolicies.authentication.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get serviceroles.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
$ kubectl get servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io --all-namespaces
{{< /text >}}

> To make sure not to accidentally apply any `v1alpha1` security policy in the future, remove the CRD of the `v1alpha1` security policy using the following commands:

Reviewer 5: Should this be a post-upgrade step or do we want people to do this before upgrading?

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl delete crd policies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd meshpolicies.authentication.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd rbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd clusterrbacconfigs.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd serviceroles.rbac.istio.io
$ kubectl delete crd servicerolebindings.rbac.istio.io
{{< /text >}}

## Istio configuration during installation

> Historically, Istio deployed certain configuration objects as part of the installation. This caused problems with upgrades, a confusing user experience, and makes the installation less flexible. As a result, we minimized the configurations we ship as part of the installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Past Istio releases deployed configuration objects during installation. The presence of those objects caused the following issues;

- Problems with upgrades
- A confusing user experience
- A less flexible installation

To address these issues, Istio 1.6 minimized the configuration objects deployed during installation.
```

> This includes a variety of configurations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configurations are impacted:
```

> * The `global.mtls.enabled` setting previously enabled strict mTLS. This setting was removed to avoid confusion.  You should instead configure a `PeerAuthentication` policy for [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode)

Reviewer 5: `MeshPolicy` is no longer installed (as it was removed above) as another example. Not sure if you want to list it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `global.mtls.enabled`: Configuration removed to avoid confusion. Configure a peer authentication policy to enable [strict mTLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#globally-enabling-istio-mutual-tls-in-strict-mode) instead.
```

> * The default `Gateway` object, and associated `Certificate` object, are no longer installed by default. See the [Ingress task](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) for information on configuring a Gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No default `Gateway` and associated `Certificate` custom resources are deployed during installation. Go to the [Ingress task](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) to configure a gateway for your mesh.
```

> * `Ingress` objects for telemetry addons are no longer created. See [Remotely Accessing Telemetry Addons](/docs/tasks/observability/gateways/) for more information on exposing these externally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Istio no longer creates `Ingress` custom resources  for telemetry addons. Go to [remotely accessing telemetry addons](/docs/tasks/observability/gateways/) to learn how to reach the addons externally.
```

> * The default `Sidecar` configuration was previously defined with an automatically created `Sidecar` resource. This has been changed to an internal implementation detail and should have no visible impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The default sidecar configuration is no longer defined through the automatically generated `Sidecar` custom resource. The default configuration is implemented internally and the change should have no impact on deployments.
```

> ## Communicating with Istiod using External Workloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reach Istiod through external workloads
```

> This release makes the Istiod host cluster-local by default. This means that the Istio control plane is not accessible to workloads that reside outside the cluster. It is now recommended that external workloads access Istiod via the ingress gateway. This change was needed in order to support multicluster master/remote configurations. Future releases will remove this limitation.

Reviewer: Is reaching Istiod through a gateway required or just recommended? AFAIK, it's required. @brian-avery Please confirm with Networking WG.
```suggestion
Istio 1.6 configures Istiod to be `cluster-local` by default. This configuration makes the Istio control plane unreachable for workloads outside the cluster. Now, external workloads can access Istiod via an ingress gateway. To support multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters, the default configuration needed to change. The Istio team is actively working to remove the gateway requirement.
```

Author: @nmittler @rcaballeromx Please take a look at this: 

```suggestion
Istio 1.6 configures Istiod to be `cluster-local` by default. This change means that an Istio gateway will only send traffic to an Istiod instance located in the same cluster. Workloads external to the cluster must now access Istiod via the ingress gateway. To support multicluster deployments with master and remote clusters, the default configuration needed to change. The Istio team is actively working to remove the gateway requirement.
```

Reviewer 2: This sentence is not correct: "The Istio team is actively working to remove the gateway requirement". Gateway will continue to be the recommendation on istio.io going forward. The alternative is ILB which is cloud vendor-specific and can't be documented under install.

So the limitation of cluster-local is what we *may* remove going forward.

Author: Thanks @nmittler. Updated.

> Users may override this behavior in `MeshConfig`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To override the default `cluster-local` behavior, modify the configuration in the `MeshConfig` section as show below:
```

---
title: Upgrade Notes
description: Important changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
weight: 20
---

When you upgrade from Istio 1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x, you need to consider the changes on this page.
These notes detail the changes which purposefully break backwards compatibility with Istio 1.5.x.
The notes also mention changes which preserve backwards compatibility while introducing new behavior.
Changes are only included if the new behavior would be unexpected to a user of Istio 1.5.x.

Currently, Istio doesn't support skip-level upgrades. If you are using Istio 1.4, you must upgrade to Istio 1.5 first, and then upgrade to Istio 1.6. If you upgrade from versions earlier than Istio 1.4, you should first disable Galley's configuration validation. Disable the validation with the following commands:

## Readiness port number change for Gateways

> If you are using port 15020 to check the health of your Istio ingress gateway with your Kubernetes network load balancer, you will need to update the port number from 15020 to 15021.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using the `15020` port to check the health of your Istio ingress gateway with your Kubernetes network load balancer, change the port  from `15020` to `15021`.
```

---
title: Upgrade Notes
description: Important changes to consider when upgrading to Istio 1.6.
weight: 20
---

When you upgrade from Istio 1.5.x to Istio 1.6.x, you need to consider the changes on this page.
These notes detail the instances, which purposefully break backwards compatibility with Istio 1.5.x.  
The notes also mention instances, which preserve backwards compatibility while introducing new behavior.
Instances are only included if the new behavior would be unexpected to a user of Istio 1.5.x.

> Currently, Istio doesn't skip-level upgrades. If you are using Istio 1.4, upgrade to Istio 1.5 first, and then upgrade to Istio 1.6. If you upgrade from versions earlier than Istio 1.4, you should first disable Galley's configuration validation. Disable the validation with the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Istio doesn't support skip-level upgrades. If you are using Istio 1.4, upgrade to Istio 1.5 first, and then upgrade to Istio 1.6. If you upgrade from versions earlier than Istio 1.4, you should first disable Galley's configuration validation. Disable the validation with the following commands:
```

> 

Reviewer: The needed commands to disable validation are still pending.

> ## Readiness port number change for Gateways

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Change the readiness port number of Gateways
```

> If you are using port 15020 to check the health of your Istio ingressgateway with your Kubernetes network load balancer, you will need to update the port number from 15020 to 15021.

Reviewer: Ideally, we should include the command to make this change.
```suggestion
If you are using the `15020` port to check the health of your Istio ingress gateway with your Kubernetes network load balancer, change the port  from `15020` to `15021`.
```

To safely upgrade from the legacy installation method that uses Helm charts, perform a [control plane revision](/blog/2020/multiple-control-planes/). Upgrading in-place is not supported. Upgrading could result in downtime unless you perform a [canary upgrade](/docs/setup/upgrade/#canary-upgrades).

## Support ended for `v1alpha1` security policy

Istio 1.6 no longer supports the following security policy APIs:

- [`v1alpha1` authentication policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/)
- [`v1alpha1` RBAC policy](https://archive.istio.io/v1.4/docs/reference/config/security/istio.rbac.v1alpha1/) 

Istio 1.6 starts ignoring these `v1alpha1` security policy APIs.

Istio 1.6 replaced the `v1alpha1` authentication policy with the following APIs:

- The [`v1beta1` request authentication policy](/docs/reference/config/security/request_authentication) 
- The [`v1beta1` peer authentication policy](/docs/reference/config/security/peer_authentication)

Istio 1.6 replaces the `v1alpha1` RBAC policy APIs  with the [`v1beta1` authorization policy APIs](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/). 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
